hey i would like to
welcome you all good morning good
afternoon good evening
to all of you who are joining us from
many different locations
to what is the first
memorial lecture dedicated to our
beloved friend
comrade
teacher
mentor and colleague david graber
this is the first david graber memorial
lecturer
and our first speaker is dr alba shah
before introducing alpa let me just say
that this is a co-production
so to speak
convergence of efforts of several
academic departments all of them very
dear to david
departments and universities that were
close to david and to david's work
that is anthropology and social change
here at california institute of integral
studies
that is the institute of social sciences
and humanities at wap puebla mexico
the elizabeth briere school of social
innovation located at saint paul
university in ottawa canada
and the university that david cared
about a lot
and that is rojo university located in
syria
david visited most of these places if
not all several times and
it is very emotional and this is
in many ways
speaking as a host or one of the hosts
the most difficult
lecture that i ever had to introduce
so this is a moment when we celebrate
david
and we have decided to celebrate david
in company of one of his closest
colleagues and closest friends
and that is alpha
so i'm just briefly going to introduce
alpa
who is
a friend
and a comrade and somebody from whom i
learned a lot especially from his first
book which is called in the shadows of
the state published in 2010
a book that was dedicated about
indigenous politics to indigenous
politics environmentalism migration
development
based on long-term participant
observation amongst indigenous people in
india
and
alpa's second book
that came out in i believe it was 2018
was ground dine by growth tribe cast
class and inequality in 21st century
india which became the book of the year
for the hindu she has also co-created a
photo exhibition behind the indian boom
based on this research
however the book that alpha is probably
best known for is called night march
and the full title is night march among
india's revolutionary guerrillas
and this book has become something of
a must read among
different departments of anthropology
and i would add political science
sociology across the world
it was a winner of 2020 association of
political and legal anthropology book
prize it was shortlisted for 2019
overall prize for political writing
and the new india foundation book prize
it was also a 2018 book of the year for
the new statesman history workshop
workshops india hindu year in review
book a hong kong free press best human
rights book and a public anthropologist
must read it is a remarkable book
and
the book itself was based on years of
alpa living as an anthropologist with
indigenous communities
trying to understand the question that
is
all too clear to understand for people
who had spent time in india which is why
are they taking up
arms to fight for a more just society
and what does that actually mean
when you undertake a seven night track
and this is what the nightmare refers to
when alpha found herself dressed as a
naxalite gorilla in an excellent
guerrilla platoon
walking what i believe was 250
kilometers across a very dense forest in
eastern india at the peak of
counter-insurgency operations in 2010.
now the nexulites and we are going to
hear a lot about the way that naxolites
behave politically
are portrayed as a portrayed by the
media in india
by the government in india is a deadly
terrorist group
they're inspired by marx they're
inspired by lenin and they're of course
inspired by mao
and they're trying to overthrow a system
that has abused them for decades
in what i believe
it is today the world's
longest running armed insurgency
the book is remarkable and it is not the
three books that i just mentioned are
not the only ones that alpa authored or
co-authored but i'm going to stop myself
here and just repeat once again that
alpine is at the moment associate
professor or reader in anthropology at
london school of economics where she
also leads a research team
at the lse international inequalities
institute on global economies of care
again welcome to
the first david graber memorial lecturer
our speaker is alpaca
and this event has been organized by
several universities across the world
who came together to celebrate our
friend
david graber
thank you and welcome alpa
thank you andre
i'd like to begin by thanking you
and all the colleagues in california in
mexico
in ottawa in rojava
for initiating this david graber
memorial lecture series
i'm sure that david is smiling with glee
because of this collaborative effort
because comrades across the world and in
both roger and mexico so dear to his
heart are coming together to champion
these annual lectures
so it's a deep honor to stand in
solidarity with you today to inaugurate
the series
it is of course a very painful task
but we must pay tribute to our dear
friend collaborator and comrade who
inspired readers across the world
who used his anthropology
and his privileges and his powers
to tirelessly open up the human
imagination
question the inequalities that dominate
us
and show us that another world is indeed
possible
what was so wonderful about david
was not just that he was one of the
greatest minds one could ever meet
but that he was so generous in his
thinking
his writing
and acting
and he gave us all so much hope hope to
change the world make it a better place
he showed us that despite all the misery
all the drudgery and oppression we
couldn't be drowned by it
we had to fight we had to fight a
passion we had to fight with laughter
and we had to discover all the hidden
beauty around us
and give it space to grow
when i was sinking in a sea of darkness
after a year and a half in the forests
of eastern india
where a brutal counter-insurgency was
being waged against marx then it
inspired knacks like gorillas
it was david who gently
slowly but persistently gave me hope to
live and act in the world again
for more than 10 years david and i were
not only colleagues but the deepest of
friends talking daily for years knowing
the other one was there
it's hard for all of us who are close to
him
personally or through his writings
to come to terms with his loss
david was fun he was kind he was caring
he was generous
all of these qualities are reflected in
his writings
when i met david he had just published
two remarkable remarkable books
there's a lost people his ethnography of
madagascar and towards an
anthropological theory of value
apart from a range of journal articles
there was also fragments of an anarchist
anthropology which is a kind of
manifesto for what was to follow
and he was working on debt the book that
the world beyond was waiting to read
published just after the 2008 financial
crisis
in the years since i watched from close
quarters the excitement of discovery and
mischief
the plotting and the curation the
sleepless nights and the pain
with which he grew his extraordinary
gifts of writing
he cultivated them beyond the ivory
towers of the university and into the
streets with boundless energy
david brought anthropology to the world
and at the same time he fundamentally
transformed anthropology
david wrote furiously as though there
were no tomorrow
he communicated as widely as he could
ideas that could that could be used to
shape a more emancipated world
well david you have succeeded in
becoming immortal
and this lecture series is one testament
to that
i have to admit that when the invitation
to inaugurate the series came i wanted
to decline postpone andre will recall
they say that time will heal
that in time we develop new
relationships with those who leave us
but to write a lecture for you now david
would have been to stare endlessly at a
blank screen tears welling up
but then i recalled that i had already a
meditation that was attributed to you
so david
i share it with you
i missed our friends and comrades
you may be surprised
for living with the tragedy of
revolutionary utopianists in the jungles
of india i always reminded you of the
dystopia that is embedded in utopia
and why we can't just offer other
possibilities
why we need to merge the ideationalist
with the materialist
reinsert the political and economic
forces of history into our ideologies of
social change
in fact i increasingly came to
understand what i was doing as some sort
of marriage between your anarchist
inspiration
and the marxist inspiration of my jungle
friends in india
but david in this lecture i'm putting
aside the materialist in me
i'm indulging fully in your spirit
and i'm immersing myself in you
and the sheer power of imagination
as you saw yourself doing
i present
an anthropological gift
an offering for other possibilities for
how we could continue
to rethink democracy
and leadership
so
let me begin
liberal democracy as a means of
collective self-rule and the values it
has promoted has revealed itself to be
hollow
democratically elected leaders routinely
deprive people of basic rights serve
their own interests that of corporate
power generating vast inequalities
in the nations which considered
themselves as global custodians of
democracy
fighting war on terror to defend
democracy from its foreign enemies
seasoned bullies
have ruled
i uh i don't want to name any names but
let me if i can i will show you a
picture
um
i can't figure out how to share
share slides here hang on a second
oh well perhaps you don't need them you
don't need to imagine the seasoned
bullies that rule our world
and you don't need a picture to see them
in your minds in the democracy project
david um
highlighted that the thing that we call
democracy with its
professional politicians
its political parties and its
preoccupation with money
has
been entirely co-opted by financial
capitalism
this is no accident
it's not that democracy has failed but
that what most people call democracy is
in fact the opposite of the real thing
it protects the interests of the few at
the expense of the many
in india the country where i have done
most of my field research
hindu supremacism has taken hold with
narendra modi at the helm
a man whose chest size is more discussed
in public forum than the thousands of
muslims murdered under his watch
with the country celebrated as the
world's largest democracy it is
procedural democracy that is fetishized
right the way that rulers are elected
that there is a routine process of
casting a vote
not the kinds of powers they hold the
way it is exercised or the values they
promote
elections have come to stand for some
kind of gold standard of what democracy
ought to be
today under such electoral democracy
the constitutional promises of equality
and dignity are very far-fetched
many people are disappeared thrown into
detention camps have their lands
snatched from under their feet their
last vestiges of basic labor rights
undermined
in the last weeks we have seen hundreds
of thousands being killed because of the
crimes of negligence of humanity that
are being laid bare by the covet 19
pandemic
in india anyone speaking out against
these injustices is likely to be
harassed by the police have cases filed
against them and face imprisonment
intellectuals lawyers democratic rights
activists have been targeted
many of my colleagues and friends are
now in prison
under-democracy has flourished a form of
capitalism that has exacerbated stark
socioeconomic inequalities backed by
extreme violence both concealed and open
it's clear that we need a radical
rethinking of the values of leadership
that underpin liberal electoral
democracies
in the spirit of our comrades in mexico
and roger who have for decades been
experimenting with democracy we need we
need new models of how to imagine and
practice its core values
what kind of leaders would be required
if leaders at all
we need a revolution in how we think
about leadership and democracy
so drawing on my long-term research
living as an anthropologist amongst
india's indigenous people or public who
are popularly called adivasis
what i'm going to do is compare three
different models of leadership and
democracy
with the intention of drawing attention
to one that is hidden even within india
the first is that promoted in liberal
electoral politics
the second is leadership amongst
revolutionary marx lenin mao inspired
insurgents
and the final one on which i will dwell
the most
is sortation
so this is the drawing of lots
lottery
or the random selection of rotating
leaders
from the remote jungle margins of india
i'm gonna present models and analysis
which i think are of pressing global
relevance
marshall silence david's teacher who
passed away last month
is an inspiration for the method of
uncontrolled comparison that i draw on
he developed it in his famous
comparative piece on the melanin
melanesian big man versus the polynesian
chief
now these models are abstract
sociological types of which there will
be important variants and exceptions not
treated in any depth
as science said considerations of the
variance and
exceptions is necessary and desirable
yet there is pleasure too
and some intellectual reward he said in
discovering broad patterns
to this intellectual pleasure
in david's spirit i would add that there
is a political necessity
in discovering other ways of living in
the world
highlighting other perspectives as a
critique of our own reality
and for envisioning other possibilities
as such my lecture today is unashamedly
utopian
for as i will show the model of
democracy and leadership that i want to
highlight is disappearing even amongst
the indigenous people i lived with
yet i believe it is important to draw
attention to to for it may help us
rethink the premises of our own
practices of democracy
as david suggested social theory should
refashion itself in the manner of a
direct democratic process
in the sense that one obvious role for a
radical intellectual
is to look at those who are creating
viable alternatives
try to figure out what might be the
larger implications of what they're
already doing
and then offer those ideas back
not as prescriptions
but as contributions
as possibilities
as gifts
so
i'm going to proceed by discussing three
different models of democracy as they
impact on one community the indigenous
people i lived with in india
starting with democracy by sortation
turning to the rise of liberal democracy
and finally the spread of marxist
leninist maoist revolutionary democracy
i'm going to suggest that if the
insurgents prioritize economic
inequality in their analysis for
revolutionary transformation
their struggle takes place through a
party which is organized by extreme
political hierarchy that suppresses
individuality
in contrast
liberal
democracy promotes political equality
based on individual rights
but does not challenge economic
inequality
i will show that the adivasi leaders who
are rising in both these systems that's
liberal electoral democracy or marxist
leninist maoist revolutionary democracy
have brought new economic inequalities
into their communities
and with that also new political
hierarchies of the values of caste
it is in democracy by citizen the random
selection of rotating leaders that we
have a system in which everyone is
equally a potential leader
where the values of egalitarianism
prevail both politically and
economically alongside a flourishing of
individual autonomy
with this comparison i will chart some
of my wider aims
the first is to highlight the existence
of practices of democracy by sortition
which has received almost no scholarly
or political attention globally
in south asia i will suggest this
failure is a is a result of the
overwhelming dominance of scholarship on
hierarchy which has neglected the study
of more egalitarian values that lie in
its jungle margins
we need not only to introduce new
radical traditions of democracy but also
to make scholarship more democratic
i will also suggest that democracy by
sortation is diffusely connected beyond
india to practices observation in nepal
in china
and perhaps beyond
my second aim is to call for a
re-reading of leadership amongst
indigenous populations
i'm going to show
that we need
for that i'm going to show the need for
a vision of societies in which everyone
may be a leader
in our in india i argue that this
directs us to actually push back against
the critique of indigenous people for
failing to produce leaders it's a common
critique made of indigenous people
and signals a very profound re-reading
of the history of indigenous
anti-colonial rebellions
my final aim is to highlight the virtues
of citizen in creating democratic
society globally
let us remember that in ancient athens
and medieval florence voting in leaders
in elections was thought to be aristot
aristocratic and it was a and it was
sortition um that was at the heart of
democracy
let us celebrate how this idea is being
revived whether it is through the
remaking of the irish constitution
or the extinction rebels and climate
assemblies
and rather than cast them off as savage
barbaric or absurd let us learn from the
possibilities offered by indigenous
people for rethinking contemporary
democracy
globally
let's democratize democracy
okay so um i'd like to um take you
to the jungles of eastern india
and i'll see if i can get some
slides going on
oh here we go yeah yeah let's let let me
take you into the jungles of eastern
india i think i can share my screen
here
there we go
oh there we go can you see it
yeah great thanks andre
so
this is the state of jharkhand with the
the bit that's yellow in in the diagram
there it is
um in the uh it's dominated um these
jungles are dominated where i lived were
dominated by the munda and the around
people
these are people who form part of wider
groups which are generally referred to
as adivasi this is a popular term for
those considered tribal or toxinous to
india it's indigenous people
who've historically lived in its
forested and hilly frontiers
classified by the indian government as
its scheduled tribes um that's st's for
short they're just uh there are about
just over 100 million they account for
about eight point eight percent of the
country's population
adivasis uh are labeled some of the
poorest people in the world
but i think that they may be some of the
richest that is once we learn to look
beyond the quantification of wealth
in terms of gdp income or assets and
start thinking about values such as
humanity solidarity the good life or
indeed democracy
those who have lived for several years
amongst these forest dwellers as one of
them
have remarked that many of their
communities are quite at odds
with the values of hierarchy that have
dominated the analysis of india
adivasi groups are noted for their
relatively egalitarian or
anti-authoritarian values and the
dignity and pride with which they hold
these values when compared to the caste
divided hierarchical communities of the
plains of india
this is not to say that there is no
hierarchy amongst adibasis
nor that all groups are equally
egalitarian
and of course
egalitarianism by no means equates to
equivalence that everyone is the same or
even aspires to be the same
by egalitarian values i mean that people
see each other as equals equal to
themselves and thus value each other
equally as human beings
including their individual autonomy
respecting similarities and differences
such values generate a fundamental
respect for others not because of some
qualities they happen to have for
instance
talent or merit wealth or status nor
because they conform to some kind of
straight jacket of an ideal person
but for whoever they are
egalitarian values appear in many
aspects of adivasi life
they appear
in the relative absence of the show of
wealth or the idea of saving or
accumulating the significance given to
sharing
mutual aid and labor exchange
the relative
gender equality
and what i focus on today is the
egalitarian spirit through which
communities are led
scholars have noted that india's forest
dwellers do not have forms of rule that
represent enduring structures of
domination and exploitation
that they are societies largely detached
from politics as leadership and control
a quintessential example of these
anti-hierarchical anti-authoritarian
values appears in the idea of democracy
by saltition as i witnessed it in the
selection of village leaders where i
lived
so among the mundus and the orals the
most important position of
responsibility in the village are those
held by the pahan what's called the
pahan and his helper the behind borough
these indigenous authorities are
facilitate all the kind of conflicts
that arise amongst our divasis whether
it's a marriage dispute or it's a land
claim or an accusation of theft or
witchcraft
they feed the whole village three times
a year during important agricultural
festivals they look after families who
are falling upon times of need in a kind
of provision of the welfare state
they propitiate the village spirits with
blood sacrifices to protect the
community from drought fire and disease
and for all of these
purposes special lands are put aside for
them and they have seven helpers who
also have allocated lands
i'm going to return to these
responsibilities but what i want to
begin with
is how the phan and pine barrel are
chosen
which is a remarkable process which
takes place every three years and which
i first happened to witness in november
so
um
here we go let me show you a picture
it was the morning after
a festival called the kalyani festival
which initiates the first kind of rice
harvest
many mundus had gathered in the
agricultural fields there was lots and
lots of rice beer
because the spirits need drink so do the
ancestors everyone was happily m merry
a man with a
light shadow was blindfolded as you can
see here in this picture
in this painting rather
and he was given a wooden pole at the
end of which was a winnowing basket
the outgoing pahan uh he threw a few
rice grains he called in the village
spirit saranama to possess and dine and
direct this blindfolded man
and soon this winnowing basket started
shaking
and the man walked off
as if he was led by the spirit
he wandered from field to hamlet he
moved from house to house
villagers gathered behind him
and at the at the at
the first house he entered you see him
entering this house um here
uh he um he stopped shaking which meant
that this spirit had left him
um and uh chosen this house to settle in
to provide the next fahan for the next
three years
then this man was blindfolded again he
was possessed again he once more
wandered from house to house till the
spirit eventually left him again to
settle at another house
there a man who was um dressed in his
loincloth was quietly eating his lunch
uh while
the spirit declared his household
uh and and therefore him the net new new
pine borough for the next three years
and he kind of unceremoniously continued
to finish eating his lunch
now a few years later i stumbled upon
the selection process in the village
immediately neighboring the one where i
lived
it was taking place with a slightly
different twist but with exactly the
same principles so there you know there
were these like rocks which all
represented different households a
circle of rocks and the guy kind of
basically stumbled around blindfolded
and whichever rock he ended up at became
the new new pahan
for the next next three years
um
i then realized that this kind of method
of random selecting of rotating leaders
is was actually common in about a
hundred of the neighboring villages
and was recognized way back in 1932 in
the colonial land settlement reports
which demarcated land for these roles
years later i realized that um this
method of selecting
leaders represent what others describe
as democracy by sortation
now there's a number of important um
things to note about this process
the first is that these practices of
choosing a leader are so democratic that
it is a lottery as to who is selected
and of course you know i was kind of
skeptical of the whole thing so i traced
the history of the pahan and pine barrel
selection to the last to the previous 15
years and i found no pattern
secondly implied in democracy by
sortition is that not only can any
household be chosen but every single
household has the qualities of leading
indeed it shouldn't really matter who
leads because everyone can potentially
do so
third
leadership requires no special qualities
that sets one above the rest
and this is in stark contrast to the
dominant models in the contemporary
world whereby leadership is encouraged
through meritocracy individualized and
personalized attributes of courage
vision direction clarity
passion talent you know charisma wealth
rank or status
in fact uh and fourth often people don't
really actually care to be leaders at
all they don't groom they don't
accumulate or petition for leadership
rather it's a duty or a responsibility
sometimes even a burden to serve the
village
fifth this form of democracy ensures
the impermanence of power so the
responsibility to lead rotates every
three years so power doesn't actually
concentrate in any one individual or
family
sixth real power lies in the collective
of the community itself any important
decisions involve the whole community in
a process of open deliberation to reach
consensus often taking several hours and
sometimes several days
so i never
heard of the of the pahana or pioneer
imposing their will taking collective
decisions on their own
seventh um lastly it would be easy to
characterize this as a kind of
leaderless or a
syphilis system but this would be to
miss the point that actually anyone can
lead and leadership therefore rests in
everyone
now there are several caveats to note
that i don't have time to go into uh at
any length but i'm going to mention very
briefly
first these systems are meaningful only
to some of the adivasis not those who
had christianized
not those who had hindu eyes
a second corruption of the system can
happen if rotation uh ceases
third the spirits select households but
in fact it is you know men not women who
carry out the leadership
responsibilities
fourth
i found evidence of such practices only
at the village level not the not beyond
lastly it could be argued that the
ultimate selection of these indigenous
leaders is down to the spirits not at
all random
but despite all of these ifs and buts
some or all of which would need to be
thought through what i seek to propose
here is that at the core of leadership
by sortition are ideals of democracy
that counter the entrenchment of
hierarchy power status and inequality
and this is in stark contrast to the
hierarchical ideology of india's caste
system where only the selected few have
the right to rule
it's not represented in the classic
debates of indian society at all for
underwriting leadership by sortition is
the fact that politics economics
or religion are inseparable
significantly political power is not a
means to economically rise above others
in fact leaders are bearers of a
community-based community-based
egalitarian values in which significant
economic stratification between adibasis
is discouraged
so democracy by sortition then
represents a system in which political
and economic equality go hand in hand
as such it's at odds with the two other
models of democracy
revolutionary democratic centralism and
electoral voting to which i now
turn
so with indian independence came
liberal electoral democracy
today india as you know is often
celebrated as the world's largest
democracy home to one quarter of the
world's voters
and the modern democratic state with its
constitution and its ballot box is
credited with spreading the ideals of
equality based on individual rights to
replace the hierarchical values of caste
in india
but through the lens of indigenous
communities liberal norms of democracy
are in fact replacing egalitarian values
with the ideas of equal rights as
property to create both new hierarchical
values and new socioeconomic
inequalities
nowhere is this more evident than in the
rise of the leader elected through the
ballot box the member of legislative
assembly the mla
with a modern state came the granting of
equal opportunity for all on the basis
of citizenship
but also special opportunities for some
on the basis of community because of the
historic injustices they suffered which
need rectification
so india actually put in place um a very
extensive um policies of affirmative
action for its addibasi's
st's and its ballots schedule
schedule cast populations these include
reservations for uh scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes as mlas or mps members
of parliament in areas where they are
numerically dominant as well as reserve
places in higher education in government
institutions
in proportion to their representation in
the total population
now i don't have time to explore the
nuances of the transformation in adivasi
relations with the state that followed
but what i share now is that where i
lived the first adivasi mlas tried to
win over the indigenous vote the adivasi
vote and to get people to vote in the
first place by protecting indigenous
systems from the reach of the state
so democracy as an ideal was actually
separated from the modern state
over time though the mla's own
participation in the electoral process
undermined adivasi egalitarian values
this is because as an mla it's necessary
to operate in the wider electoral system
governed by the higher costs and classes
negotiate one's position at the regional
and national level in party and state
structures compete in terms which are
set by a very different set of values of
cultivating individual power
accumulating wealth charisma and status
the result is that leaders end up
differentiating themselves from their
communities
they build themselves you know brick
mansions in place of mud huts they wear
you know the kurta pyjama the white
pants and and trousers or pants and
shirts instead of their kind of lungi or
wrap around they cultivate an image of
their anytime access to muscle power
against those in their way
and they increasingly treat women as
their property
at the heart of this transformation i
believe is that
electoral democracy in india brings very
different values of leadership to the
indigenous model i described earlier one
which involves the intertwining of crime
business and politics in a kind of mafia
rule or raj that some have said has now
become indigenous to south asia
marxist critiques of procedural
electoral democracy have long argued
it's simply the tool of a tiny majority
class to rule and that democracy under
capitalism formally separates politics
from economics
on the one hand you have procedural
democracy promising political equality
everyone can equally vote in in um
in a representative government but on
the other hand the structures and
processes that
perpetuate economic inequality
um uh are are kind of left uh are are
left intact
um
recent changes in in the indian law have
actually laid bare the the ways in which
the capitalist classes are completely um
uh um intertwined with with with with um
with political power
um
because there's increased spending
corporate spending on elections has
allowed corporate power can unashamedly
now control the state just like in the
us
my wider point is that looking bottom up
from the experience of indigenous
communities while procedural electoral
democracy may allow
um
indigenous people to
enter mainstream politics it also brings
in a new form of leadership which goes
together with the cultivation of new
inequalities and hierarchies
so where i lived the first three adivasi
mlas who dominated electoral politics
from the 1960s came to be seen as
immoral spoiled men echoing the old
adage that you know power corrupts
however
as a young
generation of adivasi youth arise who
can also access state sector jobs and
move beyond the worlds of their parents
the new values which are being
cultivated by these mlas represent a
much wider transformation of adivasi
norms
let me um summarize some of that here
through this uh slide if i can share it
let's see
um
there we go
yeah
oh yeah these are the these are the last
chief ministers of jharkhand um
here we go so yeah we have you know new
degrees of accumulating uh and saving
money
new kinds of patterns of consumption
seeking to present an individual above
the rest all changes bringing in a kind
of new economic differentiation amongst
the adivasis
at the same time
low-cost upward mobility comes with
them reproducing many higher caste
values the most striking example is a
more
patriarchal machismo amongst men at the
heart of of which is the control of
women's sexuality
but perhaps the greatest
tragedy
of the hierarchical values enhanced by
the spread of the liberal democratic
state amongst the buses is actually the
feeling of one's in inferiority these
are the others
uh in the social above above you in the
social hierarchy
so if adivasis once roamed the forests
and fields where the confidence or
tournament autonomy and dignity in
themselves the increased participation
in the liberal processes in the liberal
democratic state and the mod in actually
interiorizes the inferiority that others
have ascribed to them
this is a psychological trauma that very
always so astutely described as a kind
of loss of nerve
the political response uh from adidas
adivasi political leaders to this loss
of nerve is a development of of a kind
of identity politics of an adivasi
identity politics indeed the
introduction of the very term adivasi is
itself a part of this demanding equal
recognition recognition on the basis of
identity which is now seen as a kind of
property but it's actually got little to
do with the indigenous values
represented in leadership by sortation
so my basic proposition then is that
democratically elected leaders are
bearers of a system of political
equality based on individual or group
rights which in fact exacerbates
economic inequalities as some
individuals seek to rise above the rest
and that amongst the adivasis actually
brings new hierarchical values combined
with a rising inferiority complex
so altogether these changes undermine
the egalitarian values that democratic
leadership through sortition represents
now
let me turn
to my final
model
of democracy
spreading amongst the adivasis were
those who saw electoral democracy as a
sham
who considered economic inequality as a
source of all oppression and who for the
last 50 years had been fighting for an
equal society for everyone a true
democracy a communist one
these were marx lenin and mao inspired
insurgents underground armed
revolutionaries popularly called the
next slides after the himalayan village
of naxalbari where they raised their
first rebellion in 1967.
three decades later they began creating
their guerrilla strongholds in the
forests and hills of central and eastern
india where the adivasis lived
although many outsiders before them had
actually failed to infiltrate these
forests the adivasis became the main
support base of the nax lights and it's
here in the heart of the country that
the guerrillas grew in strength
in 2004 various snacks like groups
united to form the communist party of
india maoist
to strengthen their armed fight to take
over the indian state
soon these maoists as they became calls
were labeled india's greatest internal
security threat by the then prime
minister and new rounds of
counter-insurgency operations to wipe
them out were begun and are ongoing
i happen to live
in an around dominated village
in agaria stronghold of the maoists
between 2008 and 2010 at the peak of
counter-insurgency operations and
explored not only the wider changes
amongst the adibasi caused by the
caused by the gorilla movement but also
life in the guerrilla armies
as per marxist leninist theory for these
indian maoists liberal electoral
democracy allegedly devoted to public
interest put in place leaders who serve
their own private purpose of hunting for
higher positions making a career
they followed lenin who said that
democracy is the best political shell
for capitalism and the real essence of
bourgeois parliamentarianism you know
that's the language they use was to
decide once every few years which
members of the ruling class is to
repress and crush the people through
parliament
so to celebrate democracy because people
cast a vote the polling booth completely
ignores the wider power relations at
stake in the electoral process which
exploit and oppress them daily
for them liberal democracy is an
instrument of class oppression designed
to reproduce a system of economic
exploitation
a revolution is essential to bring about
true democracy a real participatory
democracy
as enshrined in communism
of course what this true democracy would
look like no one spelled out though
there is endless debate about how to get
there
the indian next slides following lenin
and mao organized themselves as a
vanguard party in a protracted people's
war to move from the countryside to the
city maoist fashion
so their presence in the adivasi
villages brought in very different
values of leadership and democracy to
those at the center of sortition
or the liberal representative democratic
model
in march the military structure governed
by leninist democratic centralism
in theory all committees were
democratically elected with space to
criticize debate resolve differences
but a disciplined hierarchy prevailed
with the individuals subordinate to the
party the minority subordinates to the
majority the lower level subordinate to
the higher levels and of course the
entire party subordinate to the central
committee at the top
maus theory of the must line summarized
by the face from the masses to the
masses introduced a strategy for the
working classes to contribute bottom up
to the political direction of the party
but leadership was overwhelmingly top
down
unlike liberal democracy leadership was
not based on status nor on wealth or
charisma but above all on the commitment
to the revolutionary cause the
subordination of any form of
self-interest to that of the party the
willingness to sacrifice everything
including one's own life
to the cause
so in theory anyone could get up the
party hierarchy
as long as they showed commitment
to theory and practice
this commitment involved fighting not
only for a new world economic order to
bring about equality for everyone
um but also the creation of a new
communal subjectivity in the present
transforming yourself right for
communism wasn't just the dream of a
deaf distant future it had to be fought
for in the process of the revolution
itself in the remaking of people in
social relations and you in a kind of
pre-figurative politics of the struggle
so leadership was exemplary of a
non-egotistic classless castles subject
was supposed to be
a new name was given to the new recruits
not just for security reasons but to get
rid of all the baggage of the past
party members were supposed to get rid
of all their castus practices give up
all forms of private property refrain
from any kind of worldly pleasures and
the consumption of luxuries and any
deviants free risk being seen as kind of
egotistic and individuals pursuit of
self and selfish ends
uh and private interests
there were maoist practices of criticism
and self-criticism and rectification
which were crucial for individual reform
with this making of revolutionary
subjectivity also came the repression of
individualism and creativity to which i
will i will come back
um
my book
night march explores the many facets of
the contradictions of the making of this
revolutionary subjectivity through which
the maoists undermine their own aims
but the issue i want to focus on here is
the contradictions arising out of the
social gulf which emerged between the
leadership and the adibasi
rank and file
so
since leadership is dependent on
commitment which can only be shown over
time leaders are actually a small clique
of middle-class upper-class men
politicized together as students in the
66 in in
in the cities in the 1980s and 90s
if these leaders broke with their past
for a higher cause to go underground in
contrast the indigenous youth moved in
and out of the guerrilla armies as
though they were going to live with an
uncle or an aunt
they join for more for reasons of
personal autonomy a fight with a parent
a sibling a love affair to see a
different world rather than the lofty
goals of the transformation of the world
or even the local order
very few actually stayed within the
party going a little way up the party
hierarchies
that the adiphasis felt so comfortable
to move in and out of the guerrilla
armies was a tribute to the success of
these leaders
in treating them as equal human beings
because in fact all of the outsiders had
cast them off as savage as wild as
barbaric
and in fact i showed that rather than
reasons of coercion greed or grievance
commonly thought to be behind the spread
of such
insurgencies this emotional intimacy
which was developed between the gorillas
and the adivasis allowed you know the
movement to spread
but uh as these maoists
were so subservient to a party
substructure that was dedicated to a
specific program of transformation a
stages program of transplant
transformation
which was hierarchically imposed
as the ego had to be arrested as
individuality had to be submerged as
human imaginations had to be stifled
ultimately what happened was a common
leftist uppercast imagination of adivasi
life prevails amongst the leadership
and this is that the adivasis are above
all economically exploited they're women
sexually oppressed including by their
own men the societies vestiges of a past
that has to be eradicated
so they completely disregarded the
economic and political
values that already existed amongst the
adivasis
for they had kind of doomed them to the
dustbin of history
the science of their revolution became
like a kind of religious dogma which
might have enabled a small number of
them to stay together but which disabled
them from taking full account of what
existed around them undermining their
own reach
their maoist economic analysis of
semi-feudalism prevented them from
seeing how capitalism was spreading in
the adibasi areas including through
their own actions
and the tragedy is that this leads to
their own role in diminishing adivasi
egalitarian values
so these maoists are nurturing a slow
social and economic transformation slope
economic and political transformation
amongst the other diversities though
it's not one that they planned or
recognized
it comes from the fact that they insert
themselves into the same capitalist
extortion rackets around state
development schemes
big business mains that mainstream
politicians like mlas are a part of and
through which illicit money is gained
so like others who rise in party
hierarchies for the few advances who
ended staying up within the party work
tasked with collecting funds it's always
very tempting to pocket away some
uh for from the party needs into your
own pockets you know raise your own mud
hut into a multi-story brick buildings
acquire your own you know four-wheel
drive bulario your your kind of land
rover
send your children to private school
a new generation of adivasi mini
entrepreneurs was nurtured
frankenstein's monsters i called them in
night march
seeking to line their own personal
pockets in a similar fashion to the mlas
rising above their the rest of the
communities creating economic
stratification amongst the adivasis
so
um what you have then is a similar
process being reproduced through through
the adivasi mlas in in
by the by the knox lights themselves so
the upshot is that these revolutionary
leaders are fighting for economic
equality they're doing so through a
deeply hierarchical political structure
that accelerates the rise of economic
inequalities amongst the diversities
bringing new hierarchical values of
caste into their communities
and this is the irony is that this is
despite them trying to decast and
declass themselves
so they're mimicking the very structures
of inequality they seek to scratch they
seek to crash the greatest tragedy is
the undermining of the political and
economic world that is far more
egalitarian than the one that they are
creating amongst indigenous populations
i'll just show you a few kind of
thoughts before i end with like my
conclusion um
here we go
oh yeah
oh i forgot to show you this yeah this
is the kind of next light uh armies um
where i
where i worked and lived
that's my book um yeah these are the
vases
all right here we go so some kind of
concluding thoughts um
let me summarize the three different
models of democracy and leadership that
i have explored to start with the last
first democracy and leadership is
exhibited by the max lenin and mao
inspired revolutionaries the next slides
here we have those aiming to create a
more equal democratic world they're
prioritizing challenging economic
inequality in the analysis for
transformation but their struggle takes
place through a party which is organized
by extreme political hierarchy which is
suppressing individuality
they take root amongst the adivasis
because of their
egalitarian values however their
economic determinism and programme of
stages transformation leads them to
ignore the forms of social economic
inequality which already exist amongst
the divasis
result is that the adivasis influenced
by these revolutionaries brought new
economic inequalities into their
communities in india this has gone hand
in hand with emulating the lifestyles of
higher castes bringing in new political
hierarchies in adibasi communities
through the increased penetration of the
values of caste
in the second model we have the spread
of liberal electoral democracy in which
leaders are bearers of a system of
political equality based on individual
rights but which doesn't challenge
economic inequality
adivasi leaders rising in this system
have brought new economic inequalities
into their communities and with that as
with the next slides also new political
hierarchies have cast into their
communities
in the first model where democracy place
takes place through sortation the random
selection of rotating leaders we have a
system in which everyone is equally a
potential leader where the values of
egalitarianism prevail both politically
and economically alongside a flourishing
of individual autonomy
so in thinking comparatively about these
three cases my wider aims have been
three-fold
uh i have tried to i've been i've been
trying to i've been seeking to highlight
perhaps for the first time the existence
of indigenous traditions of democracy by
sortation in india and to suggest that
this may have a wider presence not yet
recognized
indeed since working on this lecture i
began finding remarkable buried cases of
random selection of rotating leaders in
the work of ethnographers of the tibetan
himalayas both in ladakhi india and in
nepal rarely recognized even in the
small subfield of political anthropology
of south asia despite the brilliance of
their revelations
i'm thinking of people like fernanda
piri charles rambles here i also found
such cases stretching into china
what my revelation suggests is that
scholars have overlooked egalitarian
values and indigenous democratic
traditions beyond the modern state and
its elections
no doubt this is the case in most parts
of the world as david graber and david
wengrove noted any attempt to suggest
europeans learned anything at all of
moral or social value from native people
they're talking about democracy is met
with mild derision and accusations of
indulging in the noble savage tropes
right or occasionally almost
hysterically condemned you know
in south asia part of the failure to
take seriously these traditions may be
also explained by the overwhelming
dominance of scholarship on hierarchy in
india the focus on empires and the state
the major contributors of the dumor
hokkaid debates held positions of power
in indian sociology across continents
and across disciplines anthropology
sociology political science indology
history such was their sheer weight and
force their scholarly clout that for
several decades those who tried to draw
attention to the comparatively more
egalitarian variants while likely to
have been reproached as romantic says
worst
no doubt what i will be accused of today
are proponents of gandhian village
republics as best and cast off to the
margins of the institutions of scholarly
production sidelined or simply ignored
thus
so highlighting these practices of
democracy as sortation in india is
important not only as an as an offering
towards experiments of democracy but
also as an offering to make scholarship
on south asia more democratic
moreover we need to think beyond the
nationalist boundaries uh you know of
our of our scholarship right and unearth
the wider subterranean practices of
democratic society that may have existed
transnationally well beyond our current
borders
on this i think we need much more
scholarship from anthropologists working
with political scientists historians and
of course archaeologists
but what i wish to suggest here is that
these relatively egalitarian societies
of the southeast asian massif called
zomia which tried to stay away from
state control
um may have extended beyond the regions
which were identified by james scott and
william van schendel right into the
heart of india in the adibasi belts in
the forest and hills of the center and
the east
and what my lecture might be excavating
is that these zomia societies might have
included democratic sortation practices
that stretch from india into current
nepal and southwest china and have since
been erased in almost all but a few
exceptional places like where by chance
i lived among the other verses
second um i'm calling for a re-reading
of in of leadership amongst indigenous
populations in india i'm showing that we
need a theoretical and practical vision
that argues not for societies without
leaders but in which everyone may be a
leader
democrat demo democracy by sortation is
underpinned by ideals of leadership and
values of egalitarianism among sadivasis
that are far removed from the common
trope of the homo hierarchicals of south
asia values that have more in common
with the ideals of egalitarianism and
leadership that anthropologists have
unveiled of small-scale societies
dispersed through southeast asia in
amazonia or among hunter-gathering
communities of africa which either
denied the presence of chiefs or had men
declared them irrelevant or even
rejected them altogether
the wider implication for south asia is
that we will need to read
re-read history in a new light
especially adivasi history in a new
light and think about their future
mobilization in new ways
some of india's foremost intellectuals
have said you know unlike india's dalits
adivasis have not produced a leader of
pan-indian significance who could
inspire and give hope to tribals
elsewhere indeed ram chandragupta a
pre-eminent historian of india says that
this lack of leadership is one of the
great tragedies that faces tribals today
despite 70 years of india being a free
and democratic country
in contrast what my
analysis suggests is that this critique
of a lack of leadership amongst adibasis
actually fails to see the virtues of the
values that exist amongst them which is
that everyone is a potential leader
overall what i'm suggesting is that we
need a more revisionist history of
subaltern politics than that within a
grampsian frame which already assumes
social movements require organic
intellectuals or leaders
and it raises questions of narratives of
subaltern history which have tried to
resurrect adivasi anti-colonial
rebellions through the ide
identification of one or two people as
their leaders
you know these are the adivasi leaders
are being resurrected now
for perhaps the real power of these
adivasi rebellions of the past lay in
the fact that there was no one leader
and that everyone was equally
responsible for leading those attacks
so this analysis makes us quest question
the models of indigenous leadership that
are being promoted by many social
movements and ngos alike whether it's a
self-critique of the absence of leaders
in their movements and organizations
from adivasi communities or actions to
encourage the development of leaders
among sadivasi for again what these
ideals neglect is that the power of
leadership amongst the other bosses was
holding that responsibility in common
finally what i've tried to do is show
the virtues of sortation in creating a
more democratic
society
so to summarize briefly uh rotation of
leadership together with randomness
of selection ensures that power is not
entrenched hierarchies are not uh
encouraged status is not accumulated
there is no early group with specific
qualities from whom leaders are selected
overall sortition is what gives the
selection its authority the history of
its working then can become its
authority
real power remains amongst the people at
large any one of whom can lead and all
of who can be involved in significant
decisions resolutions of conflict it's
an idea of leadership that prioritizes
the notion of
service and duty to the collective and
devalues merit status wealth power
acquisition by individuals which create
political and economic inequalities
between people
all very well and good you may say but
this is to resurrect systems that are
probably no more than a ritual residue
of a long gone era exotic even amongst
the adivasis themselves and in any case
restricted to small scale societies
right the question of scale always
brought up what relevance could
democracy by sortation possibly have in
our complex world today
here uh i want to make um three points
the first is that it's worth remembering
that it's only for the last few hundred
years that we've taken democracy to mean
elections
ancient athens medieval florence voting
in um leaders through elections was in
fact understood to be undemocratic
aristocratic even
oligarchic since only those with status
and money could win
for more than 200 years
from the sixth to the fourth century
bce the athenians practiced democracy by
lot random selection of rotating leaders
determined who was going to serve in
most offices of the set of the state
similar practices were said to be found
in florence also in venice
and there's no time to detail these
systems and there's important caveats to
note only male citizens or participants
slaves and women were left out
the second is that throughout history um
uh the second thing i want to point out
is that throughout history um
sortition the idea of democracy by
sortician has been kept alive from by
political philosophers and activists
from montesquieu to russo from marx to
clr james
most of them have been reacting against
the fact that today we see um that
although today we see representative
government as as inseparable from
democracy its modern history is actually
uh
um
is is consciously chosen the third is
that um today most of us know um
sortition
only through the selection of our juries
for legal trials
but in fact all over the world sortition
is being revived by those seeking to
reclaim democracy from the capture of
elites
today's context in which many people in
the world do not believe that elected
leaders represent their interests where
money dominates political campaigns
uh in an environment in which the media
is co-opted for and focuses on sensation
not substance
uh and where there are partisan divides
which are driving policy choices
people are
unsurprisingly looking for alternatives
in
2017 the late kofi annan uh highlighted
sortifician's significance to the to the
athens democracy forum
for preventing self-serving and
self-perpetuating political classes
disconnected from their electorates
segolene riel the french
presidential candidate envisaged a role
for certification in 2006 in rethinking
the french constitution
and
the climate various climate assemblies
in france as well as here have been
using sortition
um it's been returning through various
practical experiments of
reclaiming democracy all over the world
uh it's been called the lotocratic
deliberate
deliberative democracy demarchy and you
know various things that's been called
in which randomly selected citizens
assemblies are you know being
are debating for several days about key
issues which affect the wider public
uh
in order to make recommendations to the
public at large or to government itself
you know we've seen it in the irish
citizens assembly which actually
achieved a change in the in the irish
constitution itself in 2016 this kind of
notorious
changes uh um to bring about um
legalize gay marriages and change
anti-abortion legislation
the uk's uh climate assembly
um
uh initially called for by extinction
rebellion uh and
actually used sortition
even though its uh recommendations are
most likely going to be ignored now i
don't you know it's not the time or
place to dwell on the legitimate
concerns of all the various virtues and
pitfalls of these different proposals
for systolicion
and the technicalities of how they might
work out in practice and the problems
that they've encountered so far there is
actually a growing literature on this
well what i want to end on though is to
point out one significant issue of final
twist
um which is that although there are some
exceptions most of today's sortation
proposals um center on the problem of
the alienation of voters from parties
they're seeking political equality they
rarely deal with economic inequality
and of course you know political
equality can impact economic inequality
but if economic inequality is not
addressed political equality at the
level of selecting leaders can serve to
perpetuate a wider inequality in which
leaders selected by lot become a mere
token gesture of the idea of equality so
what the adivasi situation suggests is
we need actually a much more wholesale
change in the way we choose our leaders
and that it is such a radical
transformation that could be part of a
process that fundamentally challenges
economic and political inequality to
bring about real democracy
uh
to uh at all levels
so the point is that if real power for
major economic and political decisions
did lie with everyone then perhaps we
might be able to bring back all those
debt jubilees that david dreamed off
give proper remuneration for all the
work that is undervalued erase
persisting racism challenge the massive
corporations responsible for the
destruction of our climate and all the
other systems and structures that are at
the heart of inequalities generated by
capitalism
this is also why of course realizing the
full potential of democracy and
leadership by sortition
is going to be an uphill task for it
promises to deepen democracy and
threatens to transform capitalism itself
moving towards a trajectory beyond it
it will require significant political
mobilization and struggle
yes i know some may say that what i have
presented today is bonkers
but as david taught us perhaps these are
exactly the kinds of ideas that we need
right now
the dead
they say are sometimes more alive than
the living
david as i hope you will see through
this lecture series this is certainly
the case for you
and that's certainly
how i see you
thank you